» CHAPMAN GENERAL EDUCATION PROGRAM: HOW IT WORKS


GENERAL EDUCATION PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS

The Chapman General Education (GE) program consists of four focus areas/major categories that must be completed. The links
provided below will take you to a page for further information on each of these focus areas and provide you with a list of courses
that will satisfy the GE requirement(s) in that area.

1. First-Year Focus (3 credits) - The First-year Focus Course (FFC) is designed to strengthen your
critical thinking skills in dynamic learning seminars with outstanding faculty. While all sections vary in topic, they share the
same learning goal: students critically analyze and communicate complex issues and ideas.

2. Liberal Arts and Sciences Focus (18-19 credits) - Inquiry courses allow for study in the following areas:

 * Artistic Inquiry (3 credits)
 * Quantitative Inquiry (3 credits)
 * Natural Sciences Inquiry (3-4 credits)
 * Social Inquiry (3 credits)
 * Values and Ethics Inquiry (3 credits)
 * Written Inquiry (3 credits)

Courses from a variety of disciplinary areas and at all academic levels are available to address each of these inquiry areas.

3. Global Focus (12-18 credits) - Global Focus courses explore the diversity inherent in our social and
natural environments, citizenship and service, and require you to attain a basic intermediate fluency in a language other than
English. Courses are required in the following areas:

 * Global Studies Inquiry (6 credits or a semester abroad)
 * Citizenship, Community, Service Inquiry (3 credits)
 * Language Inquiry (3-9 credits, depending on prior language study)


4. Exploration Focus [exploration-focus.aspx] (12 credits minimum) - You will have the opportunity to explore a secondary area of
interest by completing a minor, 2nd major, the University Honors program or by choosing a sequence of courses with a thematic
focus, known as the Themed Inquiry.

A certain number of GE courses may be shared with a student’s major and minor. An individual course may only be used to complete
one GE category. For more on credit sharing between major, minor and GE, see the Sharing Courses below.

GE courses may also be completed by testing or transfer credit. Consult the websites provided by the Office of the University
Registrar regarding AP, IB, CLEP, and transfer equivalencies. The Center for Global
Education Office Global Gateway provides information on courses offered through Chapman’s study
abroad program approved to satisfy GE categories through their partner programs. See also GE and Study Abroad.


SHARING COURSES


GE courses may be shared in the following ways:

 * Up to 9 credits in your major or major discipline* may be shared with the GE Program.
 * Up to 6 credits in a minor or minor discipline* may be shared with the GE Program.
 * Additional majors and minors are held to the same sharing restrictions as those listed above.
 * No course that fulfills a GE category may be used to complete another GE category.
 * No courses in a Themed Inquiry may be shared with GE or with courses in the discipline* of the major.


It is important to review your major and minor program plans and advising sheets to see which classes in your major or minor
program may already fulfill GE categories. Many major advising sheets provided by your major department or division will identify
those courses that fulfill GE requirements. Otherwise you should ask your faculty advisor in that program or your academic
advisor in the Academic Advising Center.

*The discipline of the major usually consists of all courses that are coded in the same way. For instance, HIST refers to history
courses, which comprise the History discipline, so no HIST courses could be used to complete a Themed Inquiry for a History major.
In some cases, as for interdisciplinary majors, or in business, it can be more complicated. For further guidance, contact the
Office of the University Registrar [registrar@chapman.edu].


GENERAL EDUCATION GUIDANCE AND ASSISTANCE


Academic Advisors in the Academic Advising Center serve as your support
network for all of your GE questions. They can assist you with planning your first year GE courses and
courses taken later in your program. They can direct you to suggested GE program options that meet your interests, help you with
identifying shared GE courses in your major, and assist you in incorporating GE courses in your four-year plan.

Faculty advisors and mentors can also help you in selecting the best GE options to meet your academic goals that may tie to your
major.

A list of Frequently Asked Questions is provided.

When the answers cannot be found from the resources above, submit your question to advising@chapman.edu,
which provides you with access to an Academic Advisor who may be able to answer your question, or direct you to the person or
office best able to address the issue you raise.

In order to track your GE Program completion, check the General Education Requirements section of your program evaluation
regularly. Because GE courses are automatically assigned to GE categories in the Office of the University Registrar, you may wish
to change which courses are assigned to certain categories. To do so, you can use the following form.
